README.md, before:

# Retirement Enjoyment Simulator

This project models lifetime utility ("enjoyment") as a function of constant monthly spending, investment returns, salary growth, and retirement timing. It helps explore the trade-off between retiring early (more time to enjoy money) and preserving wealth for longer horizons.

## Project structure
- `retirement_enjoyment_simulator.py` — the main Python script (deterministic simulator + grid-based feasible spending finder using `bisect`).
- `max_feasible_spending_by_age.csv` — output produced when running the main script (saved automatically).
- `README.md` — this file.
- `TODO.md` — prioritized list of improvements and experiments.

## Key assumptions (defaults)
- Initial age: **30**
- Final age: **90**
- Initial wealth: **500,000 CAD**
- Initial monthly income: **8,000 CAD**
- Income annual growth (real): **1%/yr**
- Retired monthly income: **0**
- Investment annual growth (real): **5%/yr**
- Monthly spending: **3000**
- Utility exponent pre-retire: **0.0** (log utility)
- Utility exponent post-retire: **null** (same as pre)
- Utility multiplier pre-retire: **1.0**
- Utility multiplier post-retire: **1.7** (leisure multiplier after retirement, per-dollar enjoyment is 70% higher)

These defaults can be modified by editing the script or importing functions into your own code.

## Running the script
1. Create a virtual environment and install dependencies (optional but recommended):

```bash
python -m venv .venv
source .venv/bin/activate  # macOS / Linux
.venv\Scripts\activate     # Windows
pip install numpy pandas
```

2. Run the script:

```bash
python retirement_enjoyment_simulator.py
```

The script runs a grid search for retirement ages 34..45 using a spending grid (0..30,000 by default, step=100) and prints a table of the maximum feasible constant monthly spending for each age along with total modeled lifetime enjoyment and final wealth, saving results to a CSV file.

## Extending the project
This project is intentionally compact. The `retirement_enjoyment_simulator.py` script is designed so you can:

- plug in Monte Carlo returns to evaluate ruin probability
- add a utility component for working years
- model multi-component spending (experience vs goods)
- add taxes, pensions, and account-specific withdrawal rules for Canada
- incorporate dynamic asset allocation or glidepaths

See `TODO.md` for a prioritized list of next steps.

## Notes and limitations
This is a **deterministic** simulator and does not model sequence-of-returns risk, taxes, pensions, or stochastic shocks. The results are sensitive to input choices (especially investment return, L_post and the utility function). Use the tool for exploration and sensitivity analysis rather than as single-source financial advice.

Commit message:

Externalize configuration to config.json and add grid params
Move hardcoded simulation defaults from README.md to config.json for easier modification without code changes. Add new configurable parameters for spending grid (min, max, step), retirement age range (min, max), and epsilon for log utility to prevent errors with low spending values. Update script to use these configs and adjust log calculation to use epsilon.

README.md, after:

# Retirement Enjoyment Simulator

This project models lifetime utility ("enjoyment") as a function of constant monthly spending, investment returns, salary growth, and retirement timing. It helps explore the trade-off between retiring early (more time to enjoy money) and preserving wealth for longer horizons.

## Project structure
- `retirement_enjoyment_simulator.py` — the main Python script (deterministic simulator + grid-based feasible spending finder using `bisect`).
- `README.md` — this file.
- `TODO.md` — prioritized list of improvements and experiments.

Default parameters are configured in config.json. See the file for current values and modify as needed.

## Running the script
1. Create a virtual environment and install dependencies (optional but recommended):

```bash
python -m venv .venv
source .venv/bin/activate  # macOS / Linux
.venv\Scripts\activate     # Windows
pip install numpy pandas
```

2. Run the script:

```bash
python retirement_enjoyment_simulator.py
```

The script runs a grid search for retirement ages as defined in config.json using a spending grid as defined in config.json and prints a table of the maximum feasible constant monthly spending for each age along with total modeled lifetime enjoyment and final wealth.

## Extending the project
This project is intentionally compact. The `retirement_enjoyment_simulator.py` script is designed so you can:

- plug in Monte Carlo returns to evaluate ruin probability
- add a utility component for working years
- model multi-component spending (experience vs goods)
- add taxes, pensions, and account-specific withdrawal rules for Canada
- incorporate dynamic asset allocation or glidepaths

See `TODO.md` for a prioritized list of next steps.

## Notes and limitations
This is a **deterministic** simulator and does not model sequence-of-returns risk, taxes, pensions, or stochastic shocks. The results are sensitive to input choices (especially investment return, L_post and the utility function). Use the tool for exploration and sensitivity analysis rather than as single-source financial advice.
